Fixing WCS bug (#116)
ConnorStoneAstro/AutoProf: docs/coordinates.rst

===========
Coordinates
===========

Coordinate systems in astronomy can be complicated, AstroPhot is no
different. Here we explain how coordinate systems are handled to help
you avoid possible pitfalls.

Basics
------

There are three main coordinate systems to think about.

#. ``world`` coordinates are the classic (RA, DEC) that many
   astronomical sources are represented in. These should always be
   used in degree units as far as AstroPhot is concerned.
#. ``plane`` coordinates are the tangent plane on which AstroPhot

>    performs it's calculations. Working on a plane makes everything

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   performs its calculations. Working on a plane makes everything
```

   linear and does not introduce a noticible effect for small enough
   images. In the tangent plane everything should be represented in
   arcsecond units.
#. ``pixel`` coordinates are specific to each image, they start at
   (0,0) in the center of the [0,0] indexed pixel. These are
   effectively unitless, a step of 1 in pixel coordinates is the same
   as changing an index by 1. Though image array indexing is flipped

>    so pixel coordinate (1,0) represents the center of the index [0,1]

Reviewer: This statement about "indexing is flipped" could use some more explanation.  Is this true for all images?  Is this a question of how an image displayed in implot or printed as a matrix, or is it about how the data are stored in memory?

Author: That's a good question. Every image I've encountered has this kind of indexing. I'm not sure how to detect if this is not the case. It's also fairly easy to fix on the user side by just taking the transpose before passing the image to AstroPhot. 

I'm happy to add more explanation here at least so that users know exactly what is happening under the hood.

Reviewer: I don't think there's anything that the user should ever have to do about this.  Any "flipping" from detectors being oriented in different ways is encoded in the WCS.

The question I was trying to get at is the indexing you're referring to here sounds like a question of row-major or column-major order.

Author: yes row/column major order is probably what I meant (based on wikipedia). I don't think users will need to worry too much about this but sometimes one has to convert things around. For example GALFIT works in pixel coordinates so someone may want to compare GALFIT results and AstroPhot results and so they'll need to be really clear about what pixel goes where. Not sure if this information will help or hurt more for most users. It's something I'm happy to revisit, but I think I'll keep it for now.

   pixel. Also, in the pixel coordinate system the values are
   represented by floating point numbers and so (1.3,2.8) is a valid
   pixel coordinate that is just partway between pixel centers.

Tranformations exist in AstroPhot for converting ``world`` to/from
``plane`` and for converting ``plane`` to/from ``pixel``. The best way
to interface with these is to use the ``image.window.world_to_plane``
for any AstroPhot image object (you may similarly swap ``world``,
``plane``, and ``pixel``).

One gotcha to keep in mind with regards to ``world_to_plane`` and
``plane_to_world`` is that AstroPhot needs to know the reference
(RA_0, DEC_0) where the tangent plane meets with the celestial
sphere. You can set this by including ``reference_radec = (RA_0,
DEC_0)`` as an argument in an image you create.  If a reference is not
given, then one will be assumed based on avaialble information. Note

> that if you are doing multiband analysis you should ensure that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that if you are doing simultaneous analysis over multiple images you should ensure that the
```

This is important for multi-image analysis, whether is multiple images in the same band, or images in different bands.

center of a sphere projected onto a plane. For the exact
implementation by AstroPhot see the `Wolfram MathWorld
<https://mathworld.wolfram.com/GnomonicProjection.html>`_ page.

On small scales the choice of projection doesn't matter. For very
large images the effect may be detectable, though it is likely
insignificant compared to other effects in an image. Just like the
``reference_radec`` you can choose your projection system in an image
you construct by passing ``projection = 'gnomonic'`` as an argument.
Just like with the reference coordinate, for images to "talk" to each
other they should have the same projection.

If you really want to change the projection after an image has
been created (warning, this may cause serious missalignments between
images), you can force it to update with::

  image.window.projection = 'steriographic'

which would change the projection to steriographic. The image won't
recompute its position in the new projection system, it will just use
new equations going forward. Hence the potential to seriously mess up
your image alignmnt if this is done after some calculations have
already been performed.

Talking to the world
--------------------

> If you have images with WCS information (likely Astropy WCS) then you

Reviewer: What does "Astropy WCS" refer to here?  Is an "image" the FITS file -- in which case the WCS is stored in the header.  Is an "image" the in-memory data array along with an Astropy WCS object holding the WCS?

I might suggest removing the parenthetical.  I don't think it helps the reader.

Author: fair enough. I'll see if I can make it clearer, or just remove it

will want to use this to map images onto the same tangent plane. That
is mostly described in the basics section, however there are some more
features you can take advantage of. When creating an image in
AstroPhot, you need to tell it some basic properties so that the image
knows how to place itself in the tangent plane. Using the WCS object

> you should be able to recover the coordinates of the image in (RA,

Reviewer: Does this `wcs.wcs.crval` refer to an AstroPy `WCS` object or to the AstroPhot WCS class?

Author: This is an AstroPy WCS object, so I'll have to make that clearer

DEC), for an example wcs object you could accomplish this by
doing something like::

  ra, dec = wcs.wcs.crval

meaning that you know the world position of the image. To have
AstroPhot place the image at the right location in the tangent plane
you can use the ``wcs`` argument when constructing the image which
would look something like::

  image = ap.image.Target_Image(
      data = data,
      reference_radec = (ra, dec),
      wcs = wcs,
  )

AstroPhot will set the reference RA, DEC to these coordinates and also
set the image in the correct position. A more explicit alternative is

> to just say what the reference coordiante should be. That would look

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to just say what the reference coordinate should be. That would look
```

specifies the position of a particular image.  Another similar option is to set
``center_radec`` like::

  image = ap.image.Target_Image(
      data = data,
      pixelscale = pixelscale,
      reference_radec = (ra,dec),
      center_radec = (c_ra, c_dec),
  )

You may also have a catalogue of objects that you would like to
project into the image. The easiest way to do this if you already have
an image object is to call the ``world_to_plane`` functions
manually. Say for example that you know the object position as an
Astropy ``SkyCoord`` object, and you want to use this to set the
center position of a sersic model. That would look like::

  model = ap.models.AstroPhot_Model(
      name = "knowloc",
      model_type = "sersic galaxy model",
      target = image,
      parameters = {
          "center": image.window.world_to_plane(obj_pos.ra.deg, obj_pos.dec.deg),
      }
  )

Which will start the object at the correct position in the image given
its world coordinates. As you can see, the ``center`` and in fact all
parameters for AstroPhot models are defined in the tangent plane. This
means that if you have optimized a model and you would like to present

> it's position in world coordinates that can be compared with other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its position in world coordinates that can be compared with other
```

sources, you will need to do the opposite operation::

  world_position = image.window.plane_to_world(model["center"].value)

> Which should be the coordinates in RA and DEC (degrees), assuming that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This should assign `world_position` the coordinates in RA and DEC (degrees), assuming that
```

you initialized the image with a WCS or by other means ensured that
the world coordinates being used are correct. If you never gave
AstroPhot the information it needs, then it likely assumed a reference
position of (0,0) in the world coordinate system.

Coordinate reference points
---------------------------

As stated earlier, there are essentially three coordinate systems in
AstroPhot: ``world``, ``plane``, and ``pixel``. To uniquely specify
the transformation from ``world`` to ``plane`` AstroPhot keeps track
of two vectors: ``reference_radec`` and ``reference_planexy``. These
variables are stored in all ``Image_Header`` objects and essentially
pin down the mapping such that one coordinate will get mapped to the
other. All other coordinates follow from the projection system assumed

> (i.e. Gnomonic). It is possible to specify these variables directly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(i.e., Gnomonic). It is possible to specify these variables directly
```

when constructing an image, or implicitly if you give some other

> relevant information (eg an Astropy WCS). AstroPhot Window objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
relevant information (e.g., an Astropy WCS). AstroPhot Window objects
```
